---
title: "Abstract"
header_menu_title: "Abstract"
header_menu: true
weight: 1
---

The Nux (or De nuce, ‘On the Walnut Tree’), has been described as ‘the most accomplished of pseudo-Ovidian poems’ (Tarrant in Reynolds 1983: 286). Its disputed authorship provokes anxiety. It is too good, scholars feel and felt, to be anonymous or pseudepigraphal, and it was considered a canonically and genuinely Ovidian poem until the 18th century, with no less a scholar than Erasmus favouring it with a full commentary. Today, it is generally considered a pseudo-Ovid, despite these desires and anxieties. Recent scholarship suggests that the debate is closed—the Nux is included in the 2020 edition of medieval pseudo-Ovidiana, for instance—but this is based more on the lack of conclusive authentication than on positive evidence.

If the Nux is by Ovid, it would have been written by him in exile. In 8 CE, Ovid was relegated to Tomis on the Black Sea by the Emperor Augustus, where he was to remain until his death in 17 or 18 CE. His crime, famously, was twofold, carmen et error – a poem and a mistake. The carmen is his erotodidactic poetry, the _Ars Amatoria_, and we don’t know what his mistake was. In exile, he never let go of the possibility of being recalled, and over these ten years he continued writing poetry, including the _Tristia_ and _Ex Ponto_, which are letters, and the _Ibis_, a curse-poem aimed at an unknown enemy.

Why is this important? The Nux is a thinly-veiled allegory for the exiled poet’s own plight. Most notably, the affective core of the poem is that the walnut tree is being punished on account of the fruit it has born: ‘My fruit does me harm’, the tree laments, ‘it injures me to have produced it, it is harmful to be fruitful’, a clear echo of Ovid’s oft-repeated formulation that his Ars, poetry and genius have caused him harm. Other parallels, very briefly, include the fact that the tree describes how it is dangerous by association: although it alone is assaulted, trees near it are damaged too, ‘their proximity is the source of their damage, they receive the stones that strike me and rebound’. This chimes with an anxiety in Ovid’s exile poetry that his friends in Rome are suffering because they remain loyal to him. There are several references to the power and might of Caesar, as there is throughout the entirety of the exile poetry, including mentions of his power across the entire world - that is, he could help Ovid if he was so inclined. Suffice to say that thematically, the work is exilic Ovidian, and it moreover fits in with the latter stages of Ovid’s exile, perhaps postdating both the _Ibis_ and the _Ex Ponto_. Pulbrook compiled a long list of linguistic parallels between the exile poetry and the _Nux_.

Using stylometric analysis, this paper reassesses the authorship and dating of the Nux. Stylometric analysis strongly suggests Ovidian authorship (from Ovid’s exilic period), or an imitator with an astoundingly innate sense for Ovidian composition. Or, perhaps, a mixture of the two, given the condition of the earliest surviving witnesses (from c. 1100), which contain medieval interpolations as well as potentially ancient poetry. ‘Genuine’, in the case of the Nux, cannot be considered a binary condition, and the poem therefore has much to tell us about how to approach literature of contested authenticity.